# To Innovate, Think Adaptive

I’m not an innovation guru.  But as a newly minted Innovation Lab Director I get to ask, ‘how does an organization be more innovative’?  In my various roles I have seen companies that take years and legions of expert consultants to implement something new.  I have seen other companies where the pace of change was fast enough that a process engineer would finish putting together a workflow and it would be out of date before he could add a version number.   Most of us will think that the second company was more innovative.  It seems intuitive that a company which changes quickly is more innovative.  But a simple rate of change isn’t necessarily innovative.  I’ve worked at other companies that were extremely fast changing due to mass layoffs forcing restructuring.  It turns out that it’s tough to define innovation, let alone what it means to be innovative.  It’s even tougher to pinpoint how to be more innovative.  

As it happens, my approach to defining innovation has been along the lines of ‘I know it when I see it’.  But in trying to define innovativeness and what makes companies more innovative, that’s just not a very useful definition.  What is it that we’re actually trying to improve by being more innovative?  Facebook’s Zuckerburg used the phrase, ‘move fast and break things’ to instill a culture of innovation at Facebook.  Rate of change is definitely a component of innovativeness.  If we think of ‘innovative’ organizations in the tech world names such as Google, Facebook, Apple, or HP come to mind.  For at least a decade these companies were able to be among the first to market with product after product.  These behemoths teach us that innovativeness isn’t a one shot change, it is a sustained high rate of change.

I think a common lay-definition of innovation is about specific technologies.  Ie, new technology equates to innovation.  Is innovation Augmented Reality or Virtual Reality, Quantum Computing, Blockchain, graphQL, or is it A/B testing?  The innovativeness of any specific technology depends on the business and their customers.  A retail company isn’t going to sell more socks by implementing quantum computing.  Blockchain doesn’t matter to the end consumers of very many businesses.  What matters is that customers can access goods and services faster or less expensively.  And that means more people are able to use a new good or service.  More people’s lives are impacted and, hopefully, consequentially improved by being able to access these goods.  It isn’t implementing the technology that is specifically innovative, but rather an outcome which is innovative.  And that outcome is newness or broader access; in other words a consequential change for consumers.  

That gives us a definition of innovativeness along the lines of ‘sustained high rate of consequential change for consumers’.  Which is quite a mouthful.  And leaves us with 100% of the original question, ‘How does an organization be more innovative?’, still unanswered.  I think it’s self-evident that the structure and culture of an organization is the foundation of an innovative environment.  What is less evident is how we modify processes, culture, and structures so that they can sustainably originate high rates of consequential change.  An organization is a complex dynamic entity.  It is constantly changing in response to internal and external stimuli.  As with other complex systems, organizations are responsive to some stimuli and resistant to change from others.  Failure to understand this dynamic is why efforts to change an organization often fail.  In order to better understand this dynamic and effect change we need a foundational context for understanding when and how organizations are responsive to change.  To build that foundational context, we should seek to understand organizations as complex adaptive systems.  

Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) is a theory born out of the study of ecosystems.  It has also been applied to the study of socio-economic systems.  The basic concept is that all systems go through cycles in which they grow, mature, decline, and reorganize.  The model of complex adaptive systems recognizes that change is inherent in any system, that components change at different rates, and that all systems have a particular capacity to adapt.  On the surface, it seems like a great fit for discussing and analysing software systems.   CAS also defines an ‘adaptive capacity’ of a system.  The adaptive capacity is the ‘capacity of systems to adjust, take advantage of opportunities, and respond to consequences’.  If we are seeking to have a higher sustained rate of consequential change, this appears to be a good measure for determining success.  Having a foundational context for conceptualizing and measuring innovativeness in an organization is an important aspect of making purposeful changes.  Complex adaptive systems provides that context. 