---
authors:
- Dan Ferguson
tags:
- google
- privacy
date: 2018-26-12T14:57:45.000Z
title: "Why Are YOU Mad at Google?"
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ippontech/blog-usa/master/images/2017/10/blog_thumbnail.jpeg
---

# Introduction
On December 11, 2018, Google CEO Sundar Pichai was interviewed before Congress on the grounds that Google's proprietary search algorithms are suppressing conservative websites, thus controlling media outlets available to users in a biased way.  This hearing is part 3 of an open-ended Congressional podcast entitled "Old Powerful Men Make Fools of Themselves Asking Technical Questions with No Evidence to Support Their Opinions."  (Check out episodes 1 and 2 featuring Mark Zuckerburg and Jack Dorsey.) Anyone with a technical background can listen to these hearings for 5 minutes before understanding how uninformed our members of Congress are.  The Sundar Pichai hearing is no exception.  Take this line of dialogue for example. "'You have never sanctioned any employee for manipulating search results whatsoever. Is that the case?' Congressman Lamar Smith (R) of Texas asked this question--one that seemed to presume wrongdoing in the manner of the famous query 'When did you stop beating your wife?'  Pichai explained that it would be impossible for any Google employee or even group of employees to manipulate search, because the process is so complex and has so many steps. 'I disagree. I think humans can manipulate the process,' said Smith, unconvinced." ([Source 1](https://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/google-ceo-sundar-pichai-congress-representatives-hearings-funny-stupid-questions.html))
Sundar Pichai's Congressional hearing carried on in this way for 3 and 1/2 hours.  The "rhetorical tennis match" ([Source 2](https://www.wired.com/story/congress-sundar-pichai-google-ceo-hearing/)) as Wired author Issie Lapowsky called it, completely ignored the real questions surrounding Google's ethical practices in 2018.  Newt Gingrich's Tweet on the subject hit the nail on the head when he said: <blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Congress should hold hearings on why Google is willing to work with the Chinese dictatorship increasing its capacity to impose tyranny on its citizens but unwilling to work with the United States Defense Department to protect America. This is beyond unpatriotic.</p>&mdash; Newt Gingrich (@newtgingrich) <a href="https://twitter.com/newtgingrich/status/1071777467549933569?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">December 9, 2018</a></blockquote>

# Motivation
I do not write this to sound like an Internet troll poking at a near unstoppable Internet giant like Google.  It is useless as a single person to wrote an op-ed that challenges Google and Congress simultaneously.  Instead I write this to address the misdirected concerns of many people towards Google based on evidence that human kind can be so easily manipulated.  The fears represented in the Conressional dialogue mirror the fears of Google's non-technical users and Google's technical users that subscribe to a dystopian technocracy where the machines have already won.  I submit there is no evidence to support these claims, our time is better spent yelling at Google for labor practices and its work towards building a censored search engine than for blaming Google for our own self-manupulation.

# Assume the Following to be True
In order to defend the use of Google for day to day users, we identify "problem areas" that create unnecessary fears for users.  We must also identify source material we assume to be true.  The "problem areas" that we can easily discuss in this article are as follows:
+ Data Collection
+ Data Privacy
+ Location Services

The source materials we can assume are true are Sundar Pichai's claim that Google's proprietary search algorithms are too complex for any group of users to manipulate search results, and Google's EULA and Privacy Policy for use of its many services.  The former is backed by there being no concrete evidence of Google's search algorithm being manipulated, the latter is backed by Google's published documentation cited throughout.  If you continue reading this article without assuming the public statements made by Google and its CEO are true, I recommend you make the switch to Bing.  

# Data Collection
If you navigate to your Google account in a browser, there are three services that can show you what data Google has collected on you.
- The Google Dashboard
- My Activity
- Google Assistant lets you control what information Google Home will save on your behalf based on your interactions with it. 

## Google Dashboard
The Google Dashboard lets you see in a top-down view which Google Services you have used and all of the information you have placed in those services.  For example, the Google Dashboard lets me see I have 5K conversations saved in GMail.  It is through the Dashboard that you can clear usage history on one or all Google services and delete any accounts you may have with these services.  I did not delete anything because I save a lot of files on Google where they will not be lost due to a broken HDD or a crashed computer.  But I was able to see how many passwords Google saves on my behalf, where it thinks I live and work (both wrong coincidentally since I did not manually update them), and a few audio transcriptions including one from May 29, 2017 at 9:39AM titled "can you imagine five years having a cold" (accidentally recorded from a long-press of my old Galaxy phone's home button which factory defaults to Google Assistant).  The information Google keeps on me is all there, ready for me to access it whenever I like via the Dashboard.  Furthermore, I am free to delete it whenever I like with a button click.  

## My Activity
My Activity is a historical view of all access requests to any Google service you have made.  From here you can delete each record, removing the information from Google's storage.  Google is very transparent about what information it collects; I had no difficulty finding out how to download my usage data, delete usage records, and modify the permissions I give to Google by default.  I even tried to download some of my Google Play usage data.  Upon inspection, I could see all of my orders placed through Google (mostly for additional Google Drive space).  Furthermore, there was nothing sensitive present in the data given to me; I could not see credit card numbers or physical addresses, only ZIP codes, townships, old IP addresses, and credit card expiration dates.  This whole process took my about 10 minutes to complete.  Google's use of my search history is the primary reason why I get ads for Baeldung's Spring Boot e-book instead of ads for something completely uninteresting to me.

## Google Assistant
The Google Assistant lets you control what information Google Home will save on your behalf based on your interactions with it.  The Google Assistant also comes with factory standard Android phones, and is likely the reason I have some strange audio recordings saved on my Google Dashboard (see above).  I like the Google Assistant because it shows me articles about topics that other people with interests similar to me have found interesting.  The below articles shwoed up for me when I activated my Google Assistant on my iPhone at the time of this writing:
+ "Did 'Age of Ultron' foreshadow even more deaths in 'Avengers: Endgame?'" from BGR
+ "Something Someone Somewhere Uses...Sometimes - DEV Community" from Dev.to
+ "Spider-Man's Christmas EP Is Here" from Stereogum

These links may seem uninteresting (or even possibly lame) to someone else, but I guarantee you I will be looking at all three of these articles as soon as possible.  I enjoy the information enclosed within, and Google has learned that about me because I have permitted it.  If I went back to my Google Dashboard and trolled My Activity for records pertaining to Ultron and Avengers:Endgame, I would not see links to new YouTube videos about conspiracy theories in the MCU.

# Data Privacy
Google has certainly had security breaches in its past ([Source 3](https://venturebeat.com/2018/10/08/google-security-breach/)), but so far the exploitations of these security breaches remain minimal, if they were exploited at all.  Nevertheless I am sure there are malicious groups trying to break down Google's defenses to access user data.  But no matter how many groups are working to exploit user data, the responsibility for your data's security lies not only with Google, but with the end user.  For example, if you ever decide to go off the grid and you delete your Google accounts, you must simultaneously delete the data Google has stored about you.  This feature (or to some, bug) is discussed more in Google's privacy documents ([Source 4](https://support.google.com/googlehome/answer/7072285?hl=en)).  In short, you are responsible for the data you share with Google, and it has never been easier for you to take back control of your data than it is today.

## Third Parties
Anyone using Google Services on their mobile device is familiar with the menu that pops up after downloading a new app, requesting permissions to view their contacts, or make phone calls, or access their wallet app, etc.  This is part of Google's agreement with third parties like Uber or Seamless.  Any data Google already has about you is freely available to the third party application (not for sale).  Additional data can be requested by the application, but the user must confirm this allowed (i.e. the menu that pops up after downloading the app).  This could be interpreted as a rather hands-off process by Google, and that is not far from the truth.  Google cannot inspect every third-party solution, otherwise, it would lose its open-source developer support.  In order to keep user data secure while maintaining an open platform, Google states in its article for Google Home Help "All services are required to register a privacy policy that explains what information they record and how they use it. The privacy policy must also explain how you can control the way they use your information" ([Source 5](https://support.google.com/googlehome/answer/7072285?hl=en)).  At this point, the responsibility is on the user to examine third-party privacy agreements, just as the responsiblity is on the user to configure what data Google gathers in the first place.  Some of the information you give to Google and believe Google is selling on the side may not actually be sold by Google, but by the third party application that uses your Google data.  The only way to know for certain is to read the EULA and privacy documents each of these third-party solutions are required to provide.  The documents exist; for all we know Spotify's privacy policy may state in black and white that it sells your user data, some of which it receives freely from Google at your permission.

# Location Services
Location Services have always been a serious cause for concern among users since the advent of mobile phones.  Again, I would argue this is not a Google problem, but a user problem.  Cell towers, Bluetooth devices, public Wi-Fi access points; all of these infrastructures expose your location to any party.  Even if you are on a completely secure network, if you access any website that requires the X-Forwarded-For flag (which is most web services these days) your external IP address will be exposed, which will at the very least give Google a ZIP code to identify as your location.  This used to happen to me when I would order food from Seamless behind a corporate firewall.  Seamless believed me to be in Michigan every time I ran a default restaurant search.  It was so annoying to have to resupply my office address to get a local list of restaurants; but that is just an example of how Google tries to make the end user's experience better.  

Since Google is the biggest player in the Internet space, it stands to reason it would take most of the blame from misguided users.  If you really want to keep your location a mystery from Google, just turn it off and delete your location history from the Google Dashboard.  Of course this will be a problem for users when they try to order an Uber and it attempts to pick you up several blocks away because your location services are off.  If this is a serious issue for you as a user, I would suggest taking a yellow cab and trading in your smart phone for a flip phone.

# Google is Still Strong-Arming Me!
This article is designed to poke holes in the traditional and tired arguments against tech-giants, primarily that they are taking all of your usage data, selling it to the highest bidder, and manipulating you into buying or selling or doing something you do not actually want to do.  This argument has been going on since the first iPhone hit the market.  There simply is no sound evidence to support the claim Google is controlling you against your will.

My older brother is not a tech-savvy person.  He pays for minutes on a flip-phone.  Communicating with this man beyond face-to-face talking or phone calls is nearly impossible.  He does not have Facebook or Instagram, you cannot tag him in photos, I cannot even text him because the message will not render on his phone.  He has no location history, no saved search history, no GMail, and no third-party integrations like Uber.  I Googled his name and he stills shows up in public records.  This begs the question, how can Google be the problem with privacy when a man who is virtually off the grid still shows up on Google?

No one is forcing you the user to buy into the technocracy, it is a completely voluntary choice.  Humanity has survived for millenia without technology, integrated services, and the IoT, surely you can make it for your lifespan.  So why do we spend so much time hammering into Google about privacy when there are so many other things to be mad at Google for (see Newt Gingrich tweet above)?  Why are we even angry at Google when Equifax has not been punished at all for the breach of privacy this past September ([Source 6](https://qz.com/1383810/equifax-data-breach-one-year-later-no-punishment-for-the-company/))?  You can be sure the fallout from this breach will start affecting people soon now that tax season is around the corner.

# A Counter-Argument
Consider the Search Engine Manipulation Effect ([Source 7](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_manipulation_effect)), a phenomenon that states personal opinion can be swayed based on what is returned from a search engine.  This theory has gained traction in recent years due to the 2016 Presidential election in America which saw the coinage of terms like "fake news," and the use of the media and technology in an election like never before.  Some very poignant articles have arisen since that suggest Google is at the very least uncooperative regarding the disposal of search engine bias for sensitive queries like elections for example ([Source 8](https://www.good.is/articles/election-primaries-google-search-ranking-manipulation)).  I will even concede Google likely deserves the fine charged to it by the EU concerning the use of its services over alternatives ([Source 7 Again](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_manipulation_effect)).  Even so, I still wonder how much Google is to blame for the SEME phenomenon. 

Imagine the 2020 election, and I am doing research on the candidates that exist using my favorite browser, Google Chrome.  Assume for arguments sake I have done a lot of research about the current President and his administration prior to my research on 2020 candidates, and many the sentiment analysis about my President Trump searches have been negative.  Google's natural response will be to return results that I want to see.  The opposite is true; if Google's sentiment analysis determines I like President Trump, or perhaps even more generally the America First movement, the Conservative/Republican Party, possible even Fox News I will get results Google's AI believes will make me happy.  This is true because it has been proven to be true with much less meaningful queries, like Google Assistant's suggestion of the MCU conspiracy theory video uploaded to YouTube in the last 6 hours by a user that is followed by another user that I follow.  Now I ask again, where does the blame lie for giving me search results that have been proven to manipulate opinion by the SEME phenomenom?  Here we can safely the blame belongs to both parties, Google is ordering results based on what it believes the user will want to see, and the user is not telling Google to stop.  The follow up question is why did the user let a search engine influence his or her opinion?  

# Conclusion

Internet users need to stop spending time complaining about what is easy to complain about.  The world should start educating itself on the true nature of the technocracy, privacy, and the IoT.  Google is the biggest player in the game, making it the biggest target; but it is not the right target.  Be mad at Google, but do not for a minute think it is misdirecting you.  We only have ourselves to blame when it comes to who we listen to.  If you really cannot be trusted to develop a well-informed and un-biased opinion using a search engine with AI that is doing its best to gather information it believes is relevant to you, use Bing.
